---
layout: post
title: Sennheiser Momentum 3 Wireless -- My thoughts
description: My thoughts on my new head phones.
tags: [hardware, thoughts]
modified: 2019-12-12
---

When travelling on the plane to and from Geneva back in November, I noticed that
to combat the airplane noise when using my headset, I need to turn the volume up
to uncomfortable levels, to the point that I was warned by the media station on
the plane seat. More alarming still, I noticed that I actually got used to the
volume level after a couple of hours into a movie. As flights would likely become
more frequent in the coming years of my PhD degree, for the sake of my ears, I
thought it was time to invest in a set of new noise-cancelling headphones.

## Choosing the headphone

Noise-cancelling headphones has been on my tech-news radar for a while. I know
that bad implementations of noise-cancelling would lead to a more noisy
experience and prompt the notorious “cabin-pressure” effect. During the
thanksgiving season, I had the chance to head over to larger best-buy stores to
try out a few headsets. I ran into bad implementations (one from skull-candy had
an annoying hissing noise that is very audible above the leaked in noise), as
well as being thoroughly impressed with how good noise cancelling can be in the
Bose any Sony line up.

Noise cancelling is not the only thing to consider when a headset. How a set of
headphone sounds is arguably more important for headset. Having tested the
Sennheiser line-up as having decent/OK noise-cancelling from my trip, decided
that I liked the Sennheiser's a bit more than what Bose and Sony had to offer. To
be entirely honest, during that time I didn't try out the specific headphone that
I eventually bought (I only got to try the PXC550 and Momentum 2), but I decided
to trust the Sennheiser brand, to went for the Sennheiser Momentum 3.

## My current experience

First and fore most, I don't have the budget to tryout headphone on a regular (my
previous headset was an Audio Technica ATH-SJ33 bought over 3 years ago), so I
probably have no idea what I am talking about when it comes to critiquing the
audio quality. That being said, I really do like the way they sound. Whether it
is using the 3.5 mm line to connect to my PC/laptop, or using the USB type-C
cable to use the headphones in built DAC, they both contain significantly more
details than my previous headset. The 3.5mm cable does make the output quieter
(the impedance quoted from the product page is 450 Ohms, so most likely the DAC
on my computer is struggling to drive them), but still within acceptable ranges.
As to how good they are compared to other headsets, I have no way of comparing,
so no more comments on sound quality.

The noise-cancelling capability is as tested: decent/OK. The loudest source of
consistent noise in my room is the AC unit of our apartment, while the Sennheiser
blocks most of the rumbling low-frequency noise very well, the higher frequency
noise still gets in as a slight hiss that slightly audible when there is audio
playing. This is still very acceptable, as previously when the AC kicks in, I'm
nearly always tempted to dial up my volume because it in the way of what I was
listening, whereas now, it is more of a brief pause when the hissing sounds up
then thinking to myself: “Oh, I guess the AC kicked on”, the moving on. So all in
all, the noise-cancelling is doing its job. My December trip would be the test to
see how well it holds up on a plane. From what I can tell, it would reduce the
noise to a point where it wouldn't need to raise the headphone volume to
painfully loud volumes for typical usage.

All the good stuff that I enjoyed being said, lets talk about the stuff that made
me feel rather disappointed with the headphone. The first one I got had a bad
volume-down button, and an annoying popping sound in the left ear whenever I used
the headphone in wired mode (either with USB or the 3.5 mm cable). I returned
this headset for another one, and with the new headset, while the button is now
good, the popping issue still persists. With the 3.5 mm cable, you can seem to
mitigate it by tweaking the cable position, but nothing I have tried permanently
solves this issue. Arguably, this popping noise is very faint and is only
noticeable when no audio is playing, and isn't always present, but for a high-end
product, having this sort of bug is really disappointing. Yet another issue is
that updating the firmware breaks playback over USB in Linux, I have no idea why.

## Open questions and closing words

As of writing, I'm still trying to get Bluetooth to work with Linux, though I am
still of the mentality that wired operation would always be better than wireless
operation, so this isn't a bit problem for me, just something I want to complete
the functionality of my headset. All in all, I would say I am happy with the
overall experience, but wouldn't recommend this particular headset until I can
reliably solve the weird popping issue.
