---
layout: post
title: Why learn Latex?
description: Thoughts of the constructive and detrimental aspects of teaching Latex as the standard typesetting tool for STEM students.
tags: [latex, thoughts, education]
modified: 2020-11-30
---

If you are pursuing a degree in STEM, you'll probably run into this
dreaded/beloved rule tool at one point: [LaTeX][LaTeX]. Opinions on using LaTeX
as the tool for type-settings assignments seem to be extremely polarized between
students: those who like it usually take their passion to the extreme, declaring
anyone who uses anything other typesetter as either tasteless or mindless slaves
of the evil Microsoft Office suite; while people who hate it also hate it with a
passion, often refusing to use it unless absolutely required for an assignment,
and often vowing never to touch it again.

I thought to revisit this question after this question pop up in one of my social
media thread: outside STEM academia, what good is learning LaTeX? And I was
surprised to see that most respondent jumped in immediately to say a firm: no,
LaTeX is in fact useless outside of STEM academia, even people that have been
avid users of LaTeX. I personally think this view, though “correct” in the sense
there are little if no direct applications of LaTeX outside of STEM academia,
cannot be further from the truth: learning LaTeX properly can give you a set of
skill greatly beneficial to you outside academia. I feel the issue is deeply tied
with my main cases against LaTeX, how the use of LaTeX in most STEM assignments
failed to address what LaTeX is, and what it is used for. So let us start the
discussion with that.

## The case against LaTeX

My case against LaTeX is largely summed up in [this article][latex-fetish] from 4
years ago, and my stance against teaching LaTeX the haphazard method that usually
occurs in STEM assignments has largely stayed the same: LaTeX is not taught as a
typesetting tool, with proper introductions to it benefits and limitations.
Instead, it is taught as a loosely and often uncoordinated list of seemingly
arbitrary rules, which ends up with LaTeX being reduced to a merely a requirement
which acts as a barrier of entry for students who have never used LaTeX before.
For the few lucky individuals that manage to wrap their heads around basic LaTeX
then use this as a bragging right instead of diving deeper into what LaTeX can
achieve and usually end up generating documents that I can easily typeset better
in a typical WYSIWYG processor.

LaTeX, at the end of the day, is a tool developed by computer scientist to use
computer science methods to solve typesetting issues. Failing to introduce it as
such leave so much wasted potential on the table, with much of the reusable
concepts being left out, leading most to declare LaTeX as useless. The following
discussion for some cases of LaTeX are by no means universal, but highlight how
properly learning LaTeX can benefit you in areas outside pure academic writing.

## The case for LaTeX

### The Golden standard for mathematical symbol typesetting

Probably the most important reason for STEM to be using LaTeX is it being the
golden standard for mathematical symbol typesetting. Fractions, nested
super/subscripts, mixing uniform and non-uniform symbol heights, custom character
decorations, dynamically changing symbol size based on other content... Name any
sort of weird and exotic symbol placements for mathematical expressions, LaTeX
most likely has a way of typesetting what you want. LaTeX was so much in the lead
so many years ago that it has become more than a tool in this aspect: it is now a
standard that other tools try to follow. Be it plotting tools in
[Python][latex-python], WYSISWG [equation editors][equation-editor], even the
[hotkeys][ms-hotkey] for equation typesetting in Microsoft Word are based on
LaTeX syntax.

If you are a STEM student, chances are that you will be using mathematical
symbols and related typesetting functions in you work, whether you choose to stay
in academia or not. It might feel like a brute force method to learn something as
mundane as hotkeys, but LaTeX puts this method of type setting first and foremost
under your eyes, forcing you to learn and get familiar with this typesetting
standard.

### Document structure enforced by default

### Appreciation for good typesetting and micro typesetting

A lot of people claim that LaTeX generates good type-setting, but they spend
little time in investing what makes the default typesetting generated by LaTeX
good. This is probably the best example of how powerful a tool LaTeX is, with one
key philosophy behind the TeX typesetting engine being that there are some
typesetting just too complicated to do by hand, so let's have a machine do it for
us. Here are a couple of examples to the typesetting and micro-typesetting used
by the LaTeX that is greatly used in the field of formal publications.

For the comparison for default typesetting used in LaTeX and a WYSIWYG editor,
I'm going to paste the first two paragraphs of this article into the two
typesetters. For the sake of image generation, I'm using a A5 paper with a 0.8”
margin all around the page (this is hopefully the last time I use imperial units
in my writing), with a font size of 9pt. All other settings will be left at
default unless otherwise specified. (Aha! Here we are already seeing a problem
with LaTeX! How many users know how to apply these settings to a LaTeX document
without resorting to Google? I certainly didn't! With LibreOffice/Word, I'm
pretty confidence anyone who is mildly tech-savvy can find these setting by
looking through the dropdown menus) Now let us see the result:

<figure class="half">
  <img src="{{site.url}}/images/posts/20201130/latex_test.png"       style="width=50%;" alt="">
  <img src="{{site.url}}/images/posts/20201130/word_test_unjust.png" style="width=50%;" alt="">
  <figcaption>Display of the documents generated as described, the document from the left uses LaTeX, the document on the right uses LibreOffice</figcaption>
</figure>

I think most would agree that the document on the left looks, better. But why?
Let us get into the specifics.


#### Proper justified text boxes

For this example, let use dump the first two paragraphs of this page into a default LaTeX
document and LibreOffice Writer document, using the serif font Linux Libertine. What you

#### Proper substitution of fonts

This is best highlighted in Chinese fonts, where character strokes are packed
closer together.



[LaTeX]: https://www.latex-project.org/
[latex-fetish]: http://www.danielallington.net/2016/09/the-latex-fetish/
[latex-python]: https://matplotlib.org/3.3.3/tutorials/text/usetex.html
[equation-editor]: https://www.mathcha.io/
[ms-hotkey]: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Typing_Mathematics_in_Microsoft_Word